# MDA

MDA stands for Model Driven Architecture, which is a development approach where modeling plays a central role.

Vertigo provides tooling to take advantage of this method while accelerating development. This tooling is the **vertigo-studio** module.

vertigo-studio allows using the project model to generate source code necessary for development but that directly derives from another data source already written by the developer.

This generator thus brings the following benefits in addition to the MDA approach:

- avoids double data entry by the developer and saves time
- increases source code reliability by eliminating human errors
- improves source code readability by standardizing practices (naming conventions, folder and package hierarchies, etc.)

The elements that can be generated via vertigo-studio are:

- JAVA entities (POJOs) derived from the model
- Database creation scripts (SQL in particular)
- DAOs (Data Access Objects) that offer simplified storage access through a dedicated component per business entity (see [here](basic/dao) for more details)
- JavaScript and TypeScript entities for Single Page Applications



## Configuration

Vertigo-Studio is configured with a YAML configuration file.

In this file, you can configure:

- the list of sources that will be read to build the `Notebook`
- the code generator (mda) configuration

Example YAML configuration file

```yaml
resources:
  - { type: kpr, path: src/main/resources/io/mars/application.kpr}
mdaConfig:
  projectPackageName: io.mars
  targetGenDir : src/main/
  properties:
    vertigo.domain.java: true
    vertigo.domain.java.generateDtResources: false
    vertigo.domain.sql: true
    vertigo.domain.sql.targetSubDir: javagen/sqlgen
    vertigo.domain.sql.baseCible: H2
    vertigo.domain.sql.generateDrop: true
    vertigo.domain.sql.generateMasterData: true
    vertigo.task: true
    vertigo.search: true
    mermaid: true
```

!> We recommend including all code generated by vertigo-studio in the source control system. Indeed, these files are *de facto* part of the application's source code and must therefore be versioned. Generation is only an aid to the developer to relieve them from tedious tasks and should not be integrated into the CI/CD pipeline.

## Usage

Studio can be used in two ways:

- via a __VisualStudioCode__ extension
- via a Java Main class to launch from your favorite IDE

> We recommend using the VSCode extension by default. Reserve calling via a Java class for edge cases and very advanced usage.

## VSCode Extension

Add the [following](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=vertigo-io.vertigo-vscode&ssr=false#overview) extension to your VisualStudioCode installation.

The extension activates automatically when a ksp file is opened.

?> In addition to providing Vertigo-Studio, the VSCode extension adds KSP support (syntax highlighting and language-server)

Proceed as follows:

1. Place the `studio-config.yaml` file at the project root.
2. Create/Edit your ksp files to design your project
3. In VSCode: *Terminal* > *Run Task...* > *vertigo-studio* > *clean-watch*

?> There are several types of tasks; `watch` type tasks monitor KSP file modifications to continuously generate code.

?> For changes to be automatically detected in Eclipse, make sure to enable native hooks in Eclipse preferences.


## Via a Java Main Class

Studio is a Java application that runs outside the normal project execution context. Its execution is therefore always initiated by the developer.

It is possible to launch Studio via a Java Main class directly from the developer's IDE. This approach allows simplified configuration and does not tie this development step to third-party tools (Ant, Maven, etc.) although it is technically possible to do so.

So, let's create a class `my.project.mda.StudioGenerate.java`, containing the `main` method that will be executed.

```java

public class StudioGenerate {

	public static void main(final String[] args) {
		try {
			VertigoStudioMda.main(new String[] { "generate", Paths.get("studio-config.yaml").toUri().toURL().toExternalForm() });
		} catch (final MalformedURLException e) {
			throw WrappedException.wrap(e);
		}
	}
}

```

## Appendix

So you can launch Studio after reading this chapter, here are files that will be necessary.

> These are obviously examples that you can modify to familiarize yourself with the concepts.

Here is the contents of the *studio-config.yaml* file
```yaml
resources:
  - { type: kpr, path: src/main/resources/my/project/generation.kpr}
mdaConfig:
  projectPackageName: my.project
  targetGenDir : src/main/
  properties:
    vertigo.domain.java: true
    vertigo.domain.java.generateDtResources: false
    vertigo.domain.sql: true
    vertigo.domain.sql.targetSubDir: javagen/sqlgen
    vertigo.domain.sql.baseCible: H2
    vertigo.domain.sql.generateDrop: true
    vertigo.domain.sql.generateMasterData: true
    vertigo.task: true
    vertigo.search: true
    mermaid: true
```


Here is the contents of the *generation.kpr* file to place in *src/main/resources/my/project/generation.kpr*

```
model.ksp
```

Here is the contents of the *model.ksp* file (referenced by the kpr file above) to place in *src/main/resources/my/project/model.ksp*

```json
package my.project.domain

create Domain DoId {
	dataType : Long
}

create Domain DoLabel {
	dataType : String
}

create DtDefinition DtCountry {
  id couId   {domain:DoId     label:"Id"           }
  field name {domain:DoLabel  label:"Country Name"  cardinality:"?"}
}


```
